---
layout: page
title: StringBuilder vs StringBuffer vs String.concat - done right
permalink: /rules/STC-0012-EX_02/
---

**By** : Jos Hirth (jh AT kaioa DOT com), the 11 March  2008 ( [Source](ttp://kaioa.com/node/59](http://kaioa.com/node/59) )

# Introduction

Concatenation of Strings is very easy in Java - all you need is a `+`. It
can't get any easier than that, right? Unfortunately there are a few
pitfalls. One thing you should remember from your first Java lessons is a
small albeit important detail: String objects are immutable. Once
constructed they cannot be changed anymore.

Whenever you "change" the value of a String you create a new object and
make that variable reference this new object. Appending a String to another
existing one is the same kind of deal: a new String containing the stuff
from both is created and the old one is dropped.

You might wonder why Strings are immutable in first place. There are two
very compelling reasons for it:

Immutable basic types makes things easier. If you pass a String to a
function you can be sure that its value won't change.
Security. With mutable Strings one could bypass security checks by changing
the value right after the check. (Same thing as the first point, really.)

# The performance impact of String.concat()

Each time you append something via `+` (`String.concat()`) a new String is
created, the old stuff is copied, the new stuff is appended, and the old
String is thrown away. The bigger the String gets the longer it takes -
there is more to copy and more garbage is produced.

Creating a String with a length of 65536 (character by character) already
takes about 22 seconds on an AMD64 X2 4200+. The following diagram
illustrates the exponentially growing amount of required time:

![Figure1]({{BASE_PATH}}/assets/images/rules/coding/STC-0012-ex_02-schema1.png)

_Figure 1: StringBuilder vs StringBuffer vs String.concat_


StringBuilder and StringBuffer are also shown, but at this scale they are
right onto the x-axis. As you can see String.concat() is slow. Amazingly
slow in fact. It's so bad that the guys over at FindBugs added a detector
for String.concat inside loops to their static code analysis tool.

# When to use `+`

Using the `+` operator for concatenation isn't bad per se though. It's very
readable and it doesn't necessarily affect performance. Let's take a look
at the kind of situations where you should use `+`.

a) Multi-line Strings:

    String text=
        "line 1\n"+
        "line 2\n"+
        "line 3";

Since Java doesn't feature a proper multi-line String construct like other
languages, this kind of pattern is often used. If you really have to you
can embed massive blocks of text this way and there are no downsides at
all. The compiler creates a single String out of this mess and no
concatenation happens at runtime.

b) Short messages and the like:

    System.out.println("x:"+x+" y:"+y);

The compiler transforms this to:

    System.out.println((new StringBuilder()).append("x:").append(x).append("y:").append(y).toString());

Looks pretty silly, doesn't it? Well, it's great that you don't have to
write that kind of code yourself. ;-)

If you're interested in byte code generation: Accordingly to Arno Unkrig
(the amazing dude behind Janino) the optimal strategy is to use
String.concat() for 2 or 3 operands, and StringBuilder for 4 or more
operands (if available - otherwise StringBuffer). Sun's compiler always
uses StringBuilder/StringBuffer though. Well, the difference is pretty
negligible.

# When to use StringBuilder and StringBuffer

This one is easy to remember: use 'em whenever you assembe a String in a
loop. If it's a short piece of example code, a test program, or something
completely unimportant you won't necessarily need that though. Just keep in
mind that `+` isn't always a good idea.

# StringBuilder and StringBuffer compared

StringBuilder is rather new - it was introduced with 1.5. Unlike
StringBuffer it isn't synchronized, which makes it a tad faster:

![Figure2]({{BASE_PATH}}/assets/images/rules/coding/STC-0012-ex_02-schema2.png)

_Figure 2: StringBuilder vs StringBuffer_


As you can see the graphs are sort of straight with a few bumps here and
there caused by re-allocation. Also StringBuilder is indeed quite a bit
faster. Use that one if you can.

# Initial capacity

Both - StringBuilder and StringBuffer - allow you to specify the initial
capacity in the constructor. Of course this was also a thing I had to
experiment with. Creating a 0.5mb String 50 times with different initial
capacities:

![Figure3]({{BASE_PATH}}/assets/images/rules/coding/STC-0012-ex_02-schema3.png)

_Figure 3: StringBuilder and StringBuffer with different initial capacities
The step size was 8 and the default capacity is 16. So, the default is the
third dot. 16 chars is pretty small and as you can see it's a very sensible
default value._

If you take a closer look you can also see that there is some kind of
rhythm: the best initial capacities (local optimum) are always a power of
two. And the worst results are always just before the next power of two.
The perfect results are of course achieved if the required size is used
from the very beginning (shown as dashed lines in the diagram) and no
resizing happens at all.

# Some insight

That "PoT beat" is of course specific to Sun's implementations of
StringBuilder and StringBuffer. Other implementations may show a slightly
different behavior. However, if these particular implementations are taken
as target one can derive two golden rules from these results:

* If you set the capacity use a power of two value.
* Do not use the String/CharSequence constructors ever. They set the
capacity to the length of the given String/CharSequence + 16, which can be
virtually anything.

# Benchmarking method

In order to get meaningful results I took care of a few things:

  * VM warmup
  * separate runs for each test
  * each sample is the median of 5 runs
  * inner loops were inside of each bench unit

The messy code is also available: [cat_code.zip](/resources/rules/coding/STC-0012-ex_02-cat_code.zip)
