---
title: STC-0006
tagline: Methods naming conventions
permalink: /rules/STC-0006/
author: boubaker
tags: [method]
controlsSeverity: [major]
status: draft
validationDate:
sinceLevel:
---

<a name="what"></a>
## What?

### <i class="fa fa-info-circle"></i> The rule

1. The first letter of a methode must be in lowercase (we don't capitalize the beginning of the first word, to distinguish
class names or interfaces from methods).

2. In general, the methods members will consist of two parts and must be named in English.

    * The first part is a verb, written in lowercase, which defines the action that realizes the method. Even if this verb is a
compound word, we will use it as one word, which will be written entirely in lowercase.
    * The second part identifies the target of the action, it may be composed of several words (Each word being separated by any
 character), beginning with a capital letter.

3. Methods for performing the same type of tasks in different classes should have the same name to maintain consistency, they
must also have the same parameters.

4. Non-constructor methods should not have the same name as the enclosing class.

5. Accessors methods:

    * Getters are member functions that return the value of a field. You should prefix the word ‘get’ to the name of the field,
unless it is a boolean field and then you prefix ‘is’ to the name of the field instead of ‘get.’
    * Setters, also known as mutators, are member functions that modify the values of a field.  You should prefix the word ‘set’
 to the name of the field, regardless of the field type.

### <i class="fa fa-lightbulb-o"></i> The solution

HERE YOU CAN DESCRIBE A SOLUTION TO RESPECT THE RULE

<a name="why"></a>
## Why?

HERE YOU HAVE TO EXPLAIN WHY THE RULE IS DEFINED

<a name="examples"></a>
## Examples

<div class="panel panel-danger">
  <div class="panel-heading">
    <h3 class="panel-title"><i class="fa fa-thumbs-down pull-right"></i> Wrong Java example</h3>
  </div>
  <div class="panel-body">

{% highlight java %}
// Methods naming : wrong examples
public void open_Account() {}
public void PrintMailingLabel() {}
public void SAVE() {}

// Getters naming : wrong examples
public String get_FirstName() {}
public int getaccountnumber() {}
public boolean ISPersistent() {}
public boolean IsAtEnd() {}
{% endhighlight %}

  </div>
</div>


<div class="panel panel-success">
  <div class="panel-heading">
    <h3 class="panel-title"><i class="fa fa-thumbs-up pull-right"></i> Good Java example</h3>
  </div>
  <div class="panel-body">

{% highlight java %}
// Methods naming : good examples
public void openAccount() {}
public void printMailingLabel() {}
public void save() {}

// Getters naming : good examples
public String getFirstName() {}
public int getAccountNumber() {}
public long getLostEh() {}
public boolean isPersistent() {}
public boolean isAtEnd() {}

// Setters naming : good examples
public void setFirstName(String aName) {}
public void setAccountNumber(int anAccountNumber) {}
public void setReasonableGoals(Vector newGoals) {}
public void setPersistent(boolean isPersistent) {}
public void setAtEnd(boolean isAtEnd) {}
{% endhighlight %}

  </div>
</div>


<a name="controls"></a>
## <i class="fa fa-shield"></i> Controls

### for Java

<div class="table-responsive">
  <table class="table">
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th>Rule Type</th>
        <th>Rule</th>
        <th>Rule Settings</th>
        <th>Severity</th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
     <tr>
       <td>Checkstyle</td>
       <td><a href="http://checkstyle.sourceforge.net/config_naming.html#MethodName" >Naming Conventions - MethodName</a></td>
       <td>
{% highlight text %}
<module name="MethodName">
   <property name="format" value="^[a-z][a-zA-Z0-9]*$"/>
   <property name="allowClassName" value="false"/>
</module>
{% endhighlight %}
       </td>
       <td>MAJOR</td>
     </tr>
   </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

