---
layout: page
title: How to manage Exceptions in Java. 
tagline: 4 basic considerations.
permalink: /rules/STC-0015-EX_01/
---

**By** : Alberto Gutierrez, January 26th, 2011 ( [Source](http://www.makinggoodsoftware.com/2011/01/26/how-to-manage-exceptions-in-java-4-basic-considerations/) )

Managing exceptions correctly in Java is not as simple as it may sound,
there are many wide extended bad practices and programmers who simply
don’t care. But having good exception handling is essential to diagnose
problems in production and to basically make the maintenance of the
application easier. What follows are, in my opinion, the 4 main
considerations to effectively handle exceptions in Java.

## 1 - An exception should only be handled once.

Handling an exception more than once is one of the most common mistakes
when dealing with exceptions. There are two main anti patterns:

### Exception swallowing.

NEVER shallow an exception. This is, without a question, the most dangerous
error when dealing with exceptions. Swallowing an exception = Making your
application lie to you. Once that you shallow an exception there is no
coming back. Any error caused as consequence of this first exception is
going to be extremely hard to diagnose.

### Exception handled more than once

Havin an exception handled more than once basically means that in its way
out of the stack trace, more than one method catches the same exception.
The two main scenarios when a exception is handled more that once are:

### Log and throw exception.

Logging and throwing an exception, from a naive perspective, may seem like
a valid approach, but is an approach that generates noise and lacks
elegance. It lacks elegance because the exception is thrown again after
being logged, causing further catch blocks in the stack trace to also deal
with it and consequently force them to shallow the exception or to log
duplicated information. To prove it let´s imagine that a method logs and
throws again one exception, the following would be the main options for
further catch blocks in the stack trace.

1. Log exception. This will cause a duplicate stack trace being printed in
the logs.
2. Ignore exception, the exception will get to the top of the stack trace,
and the JVM will handle it. This will also cause a duplicate stack trace in
the logs.
3. Shallow exception. This is a common case of exception swallowing. It
usually happens when we know the internals of the method we are calling and
we know that the exception is already logged. As already mentioned,
exception swallowing is very dangerous.

### Don’t wrap runtime exceptions without adding more information.

This is another common scenario of handling an exception more than once
that causes a lot of noise. It usually happens when inside a method we have
to handle a checked exception, so the programmer decides to catch all the
exceptions and wrap them in runtime exceptions. i.e.


    catch (Exception e)
         throw new RuntimeException (e)

 
The issue with the code above, is that it will also catch all
RuntimeExceptions, and it will wrap them in a new RuntimeException, which
is useless, because it doesn´t add more information. A better approach
would be:


    catch (RuntimeException re)
         throw re
    catch (Exception e)
         throw new RuntimeException (e)

 
## 2 - Create your own type and tree of exceptions.

Having your own type of exceptions, and your own hierarchy of exceptions,
have a lot of advantages.

  * Code becomes more readable.
  * Logs become more readable.
  * Helps to standardize the output of the exceptions.
  * Makes it easy to tell what is the source of the exception.

## 3 - Who should catch the exception?

Place catch blocks carefully, if you are not sure if you want to handle the
exception, don’t handle it. In general, only use catch when:

1. You need to provide graceful error recovery. For instance: every entry
point of your code that faces the customer should have a try catch
strategy. Remember always to handle the exception as late as possible,
otherwise you will end up swallowing the exception or handling it more than
once.
2. You are forced. If you receive a checked exception and you don’t want
to handle it just now, feel free to wrap it up in a RuntimeException, but
NEVER, shallow the exception.
3. In batch like process that loop through a series of elements. inside the
loop, ALWAYS, catch all exceptions.
4. You want to add more information to the exception. For instance: Wrap an
exception in a more specific, more related to your domain exception.

## 4 - Understand the purpose and nature of the exceptions.

The root cause for most of the anti patterns when handling with exceptions
is the fact that the developers don’t fully understand the nature and
purpose of the exceptions. An exception represents unexpected exceptional
behavior, which we can try to recover from or handle gracefully. Catching
exceptions is the mechanism the application gives us to step in before the
JVM deals itself with the exception, is the last frontier. Having this is
mind

  * Be careful with exceptions when creating new exceptions. When dealing
with exceptions, don’t make much assumptions, if you try to do something
smart and you cause a further exception, you will loose the first
exception.
  * Don’t use exceptions to handle standard business cases. They are better
off handled by your standard Java code.
