---
layout: page
title: "From SVN to Git"
tags: [git,svn]
group: git
---
{% include JB/setup %}

<div class="row">
  <div class="span12">

h2. Commands mapping

This table gives you a quick overview of *similar* commands between Subversion and Git.
Be careful that Subversion and Git are two really different SCM the first one being centralized and the second one distributed.
Because of this difference of architecture and their inner implementations this mapping must be taken as a guideline just to
start. When you better know Git, forget SVN !!!

table(table).
|_.Subversion command |_.Git command                |_.Description                                     |
|@svn checkout url@   | @git clone url@             | Retrieves a local copy to work                   |
|@svn update@         | @git pull@                  | Update your local copy with remote changes       |
|@svn commit@         | @git commit -a && git push@ | Send your local changes to the remote repository |


h2. How to convert a project

Technical conversion of eXo projects stored in Subversion will be processed by the Software Factory Team. Once the migration
done each team will have to process some tasks to finalize the project migration

# Clean-up project branches

  Due to the migration process you'll find in the new Git repository corresponding to your project in SVN various branches you
  didn't have.
  These branches may have various origins :

## It has the name of a tag. You edited a tag in SVN (It's BAAAAAD). Thus the conversion process considered that you started
a branch and then you did a tag. A tag cannot be edited in Git. You can just create/delete them.

## It was a development branch removed in SVN. The migration process restore all branches found in SVN history but never
deletes them. You can remove them with @git push :<BRANCH>@

  To follow our Git conventions you are invited to rename existing branches to :

* stable/<BRANCH_NAME> : If this is a stable branch integration
* fix/<BRANCH_NAME> : If this is a branch to develop a fix
* feature/<BRANCH_NAME> : If this is a branch to develop a new feature


# Update build

## Update SCM infos

## Upgrade plugins versions

    <div class="well">

h2. Sources

* "Git SVN Crash Course":https://git.wiki.kernel.org/articles/g/i/t/GitSvnCrashCourse_512d.html

    </div>
  </div>
</div>