---
layout: page
title: Busting java.lang.String.intern() Myths
permalink: /standards/STC-0008-EX_01/
---

**By** : DOMINGOS NETO (domingos DOT neto AT gmail DOT com) ( [Source](http://www.codeinstructions.com/2009/01/busting-javalangstringintern-myths.html) )

*(Or: String.intern() is dangerous unless you know what you're doing!)*

If you ever peeked through the Javadoc or the source code of the Java
String class, you probably noticed a misterious native method called
intern(). The javadoc is very concise. It basically says that the method
returns a representation of the String that is guaranteed to be unique
through the JVM. If two String objects are internalized, they can be safely
compared with == instead of equals. This description gives two reasons to
use intern(): because comparision becomes faster and because there can be
potential memory usage improvements because you wouldn't waste the heap
with lots of equivalent strings.

The two reasons above are closer to myth than reality. The performance myth
doesn't cause any harm, it is just that the gain is not that big as one
would think it would be. But the memory usage improvement myth is where the
danger lies: by trying to improve memory usage, one can actually end up
causing OOM errors in the application.

Let's look at those myths with more detail.

# Myth 1: Comparing strings with == is much faster than with equals()

An industrious developer could think of internalizing strings for
performance reasons: you call intern() once, even if though it can be a
costly operation, but then after that you can always compare the strings
with ==. What a performance improvement it must be!

I wrote a quick benchmark to compare both approaches. It turns out that
comparing strings with average length of 16 characters using equals is
approximately only 5 times slower than comparing with ==. Even though a 5
times difference is still a large number, you may be surprised that the gap
isn't bigger. There are two reasons for this. First, String.equals() only
compares the characters as a last effort: it first compares the length of
the strings, which is stored in a separate field, and only if the lengths
are the same it starts comparing the characters, but it halts as soon as it
finds the first non matching character.

Another reason for the relatively small difference between the two
approaches is that the HotSpot optimizer does a very good job of optimizing
method calls, and String.equals() is a very good candidate for inlining
since it is a small method that belongs to a final class. That removes any
overhead related to method calls.

Now, == provides a 5-fold improvement over equals(). But since String
comparision usually represents only a small percentage of the total
execution time of an application, the overall gain is much smaller than
that, and the final gain will be diluted to a few percent.

So Myth 1: **busted !** Yes, == is faster than String.equals(), but in
general it isn't near a performance improvement as it is cracked up to be.

# Myth 2: String.intern() saves a lot of memory

This myth is where the danger lies. On one hand, it is true that you can
remove String duplicates by internalizing them. The problem is that the
internalized strings go to the Permanent Generation, which is an area of
the JVM that is reserved for non-user objects, like Classes, Methods and
other internal JVM objects. The size of this area is limited, and is
usually much smaller than the heap. Calling `intern()` on a String has the
effect of moving it out from the heap into the permanent generation, and
you risk running out of PermGen space.

I wrote a small test program that confirm this (see below). The call to
`Thread.sleep(1000)` is so that you can see the permanent generation going up
in a profiler. You can check it yourself by running this program and then
running jconsole which is available in the JDK distribution. Go to
jconsole's Memory tab and select Memory Pool "Perm Gen" in the dropdown
box. You will see the permanent generation going up steadly until the
process terminates with a java.lang.OutOfMemoryError: PermGen space.

{% highlight java %}
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        int steps = 1000;
        String base = getBaseString();

        List strings = new ArrayList();
        int i = 0;
        while (true) {
            String str = base + i;
            str = str.intern();
            strings.add(str);
            i++;
            if (i % steps == 0) {
              Thread.sleep(1000);
            }
        }
    }

    private static String getBaseString() {
        StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();
        for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
            builder.append("a");
        }
        return builder.toString();
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}
    
So Myth 2: **busted !** `String.intern()` saves heap space, but at the expense of using up the more precious PermGen space.
    
# Myth 3: internalized strings stay in the memory forever
    
    This myth goes in the opposite direction of myth 2. Some people belive that
internalized strings stay in the memory until the JVM ends. It may have
been true a long time ago, but today the internalized strings are garbage
collected if there are no more references to them. See below a slightly
modified version of the program above. It clears the references to
internalized strings from time to time. If you follow the program execution
from jconsole, you will see that the PermGen space usage goes up and down,
as the Garbage Collector reclaims the memory used by the unreferenced
internalized strings.
    
{% highlight java %}
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        int steps = 1000;
        String base = getBaseString();

        List strings = new ArrayList();
        int i = 0;
        while (true) {
            String str = base + i;
            str = str.intern();
            strings.add(str);
            i++;
            if (i % steps == 0) {
          Thread.sleep(1000);
            }

            if (i % (steps * 4) == 0) {
          strings = new ArrayList();
            }
        }
          }

          private static String getBaseString() {
        StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();
        for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
            builder.append("a");
        }
        return builder.toString();
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Myth 3: **Busted !** Internalized strings are released if they are no longer
referenced.

Note: when == is worth over equals()

If you are doing heavy text processing you may want to internalize strings.
But in this case, you are probably better off using an approach that I
outlined here: [Weak Object Pools With WeakHashMap](http://www.codeinstructions.com/2008/09/instance-pools-with-weakhashmap.html)
. With this approach, you get the benefit of having unique Strings, but
without the penalty of using up the PermGen space.

Conclusion: always know what you are doing

As I said in the subtitle of this article, String.intern() is dangerous if
you don't know what you are doing. Now you know the risks of using
String.intern(), and you will be able to make a more informed decision
about whether to use it or not.

More information

  * The [OpenJDK](http://openjdk.java.net/) source code is the JVM Hacker's heaven. It is not easy reading though, and
you need to know C++ to take advantage of what it has to offer.
  * [Presenting the Permanent Generation](http://blogs.sun.com/jonthecollector/entry/presenting_the_permanent_generation)
 is a very good article about what is the PermGen and what goes inside it.
