---
layout: page
title: Java String Concatenation
permalink: /standards/STC-0012-EX_04/
---

**By** : Joseph Kulandai , the 21 October 2009 ( [Source](http://javapapers.com/core-java/java-string-concatenation/) )

You have been told many times, don’t use + (java plus operator) to
concatenate Strings. We all know that it is not good for performance. Have
you researched it? Do you know what is happening behind the hood? Lets
explore all about String concatenation now.

In the initial ages of java around jdk 1.2 every body used + to concatenate
two String literals. When I say literal I mean it. Strings are immutable.
That is, a String cannot be modified. Then what happens when we do

    String fruit = "Apple"; fruit = fruit + "World";


In the above java code snippet for String concatenation, it looks like the
String is modified. It is not happening. Until JDK 1.4 StringBuffer is used
internally and from JDK 1.5 StringBuilder is used to concatenate. After
concatenation the resultant StringBuffer or StringBuilder is changed to
String.

When java experts say, “don’t use + but use StringBuffer”. If + is
going to use StringBuffer internally what big difference it is going to
make in String concatenation? Look at the following example. I have used
both + and StringBuffer as two different cases. In case 1, I am just using
+ to concatenate. In case 2, I am changing the String to StringBuffer and
then doing the concatenation. Then finally changing it back to String. I
used a timer to record the time taken for an example String concatenation.

Look at the output (if you run this java program the result numbers might
slightly vary based on your hardware / software configuration). The
difference between the two cases is astonishing.

My argument is, if + is using StringBuffer internally for concatenation,
then why is this huge difference in time? Let me explain that, when a + is
used for concatenation see how many steps are involved:

  * A StringBuffer object is created
  * string1 is copied to the newly created StringBuffer object
  * The “*” is appended to the StringBuffer (concatenation)
  * The result is converted to back to a String object.
  * The string1 reference is made to point at that new String.
  * The old String that string1 previously referenced is then made null.

Hope you understand the serious performance issues and why it is important
to use StringBuffer or StringBuilder (from java 1.5) to concatenate
Strings.

Therefore you can see initially it was \+, then StringBuffer came and now
StringBuilder. Surely Java is improving release by release\!


    class Clock {
    
      private final long startTime;
    
      public Clock() {
        startTime = System.currentTimeMillis();
      }
    
      public long getElapsedTime() {
        return System.currentTimeMillis() - startTime;
      }
    }
    
    public class StringConcatenationExample {
    
      static final int N = 47500;
    
      public static void main(String args[]) {
    
        Clock clock = new Clock();
    
        //String to be used for concatenation
        String string1 = "";
        for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
    
          //String concatenation using +
          string1 = string1 + "*";
        }
        //Recording the time taken to concatenate
        System.out.println("Using + Elapsed time: " + clock.getElapsedTime());
    
        clock = new Clock();
        StringBuffer stringBuffer = new StringBuffer();
        for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
    
          //String concatenation using StringBuffer
          stringBuffer.append("*");
        }
        String string2 = stringBuffer.toString();
        System.out.println("Using StringBuffer Elapsed time: " + clock.getElapsedTime());
      }
    }

Output For The Above Example Program For String Concatenation

    Using + Elapsed time: 3687
    Using StringBuffer Elapsed time: 16

