---
layout: page
title: String vs StringBuffer vs StringBuilder in Java
permalink: /standards/STC-0012-EX_03/
---

**By** : Javin  Paul (savingfunda AT gmail DOT com), the 9 July 2011 ( [Source](http://javarevisited.blogspot.com/2011/07/string-vs-stringbuffer-vs-stringbuilder.html) )

Differences between String, StringBuffer and StringBuilder in Java
String is one of the most important classes in Java and anyone who starts
with java programming uses string to print something on console by using.
No matter which kind of application you are working you will find heavy
usage of java String class but if you do profiling of your application you
will find that String is the one class which creates lots of garbage
because of many temporary Strings created in program. In this article we
will see What is String, some important properties of String in Java, What
is StringBuffer in Java , When to use StringBuffer in Java , StringBuilder
in Java and how it can be used in place of StringBuffer, What are
differences between String and StringBuffer and StringBuilder in Java and
mostly String vs StringBuilder vs StringBuffer. Now let's start with
String.

# String in Java

Before looking difference between String and StringBuffer or StringBuilder
let’s see some fundamental properties of String Class in Java

1. String is immutable in Java:  String is by design immutable in java
you can check this post for reason. Immutability offers lot of benefit to
the String class e.g. his hash code value can be cached which makes it a
faster hashmap key; it can be safely shared between multithreaded
applications without any extra synchronization. To know why strings are
immutable in java see the link

2. when we represent string in double quotes like "abcd" they are referred
as String literal and String literals are created in String pools.

3. `+` operator is overloaded for String and used to concatenated two
string. Internally `+` operation is implemented using either StringBuffer
or StringBuilder.

4. Strings are backed up by Character Array and represented in UTF-16
format.

5. String class overrides equals() and hashcode() method and two Strings
are considered to be equal if they contain exactly same character in same
order and in same case. If you want ignore case comparison of two strings
consider using equalsIgnoreCase() method. To learn how to correctly
override equals method in Java see the link.

6. toString() method provides string representation of any object and its
declared in Object class and its recommended for other class to implement
this and provide string representation.

7. String is represented using UTF-16 format in Java.

8. In Java you can create String from byte array, char array, another
string, from StringBuffer or from StringBuilder. Java String class provides
constructor for all of these.

# Problem with String in Java

difference between String and StringBuffer and StringBuilder, string vs
stringbuffer One of its biggest strength "immutability" is a biggest
problem of Java String if not used correctly. many a times we create a
String and then perform a lot of operation on them e.g. converting string
into uppercase, lowercase , getting substring out of it , concatenating
with other string etc. Since String is an immutable class every time a new
String is created and older one is discarded which creates lots of
temporary garbage in heap. If String are created using String literal they
remain in String pool. To resolve this problem Java provides us two Classes
StringBuffer and StringBuilder. String Buffer is an older class but
StringBuilder is relatively new and added in JDK 5.


# Differences between String and StringBuffer in Java

Main difference between String and StringBuffer is String is immutable
while StringBuffer is mutable means you can modify a StringBuffer object
once you created it without creating any new object. This mutable property
makes StringBuffer an ideal choice for dealing with Strings in Java. You
can convert a StringBuffer into String by its toString() method. String vs
StringBuffer or what is difference between StringBuffer and String is one
of the popular interview questions for either phone interview or first
round. Now days they also include StringBuilder and ask String vs
StringBuffer vs StringBuilder. So be preparing for that. In the next
section we will see difference between StringBuffer and StringBuilder in
Java.

# Difference between StringBuilder and StringBuffer in Java

StringBuffer is very good with mutable String but it has one disadvantage
all its public methods are synchronized which makes it thread-safe but same
time slow. In JDK 5 they provided similar class called StringBuilder in
Java which is a copy of StringBuffer but without synchronization. Try to
use StringBuilder whenever possible it performs better in most of cases
than StringBuffer class. You can also use `+` for concatenating two string
because `+` operation is internal implemented using either StringBuffer or
StringBuilder in Java. If you see StringBuilder vs StringBuffer you will
find that they are exactly similar and all API methods applicable to
StringBuffer are also applicable to StringBuilder in Java. On the other
hand String vs StringBuffer is completely different and there API is also
completely different, same is true for StringBuilders vs String.


# Summary

1. String is immutable while StringBuffer and StringBuilder is mutable
object.

2. StringBuffer is synchronized while StringBuilder is not which makes
StringBuilder faster than StringBuffer.

3. Concatenation operator `+` is internal implemented using either
StringBuffer or StringBuilder.

4. Use String if you require immutability, use Stringbuffer in java if you
need mutable + threadsafety and use StringBuilder in Java if you require
mutable + without thread-safety.
