---
layout: page
title: StringBuilder vs. StringBuffer
permalink: /standards/STC-0012-EX_01/
---

**By** : Juha Komulainen, the 07 February 2004 ( [Source](http://www.jroller.com/komu/entry/stringbuilder_vs_stringbuffer) )

Most of the time you want to construct Strings using StringBuffer, you do
it inside a single thread. However, all of the methods of StringBuffer are
synchronized and you need to grab a lock for every single call into
StringBuffer. This is clearly unneeded overhead.

Ok, by now we all know that Tiger will contain StringBuilder, which is an
unsynchronized version of StringBuffer. Should you run and change all your
existing code to use StringBuilder? Probably not. Micro-benchmarks are
evil, but I still want to present the following:

{% highlight java %}
public class StringBuildingBenchmark {
  private static long timeStringBuffer(String text, int rounds) {
    long start = System.currentTimeMillis();
    StringBuffer sb = new StringBuffer(text.length() * rounds);
    for (int i = 0; i < rounds; i++) {
      sb.append(text);
    }
    sb.toString();
    return System.currentTimeMillis() - start;
  }
    
  private static long timeStringBuilder(String text, int rounds) {
    long start = System.currentTimeMillis();
    StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder(text.length() * rounds);
    for (int i = 0; i < rounds; i++) {
      sb.append(text);
    }
    sb.toString();
    return System.currentTimeMillis() - start;
  }
    
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    String text = "foobar";
    int rounds = 1000000;

    // Perform some warm-up rounds
    timeStringBuffer(text, rounds);
    timeStringBuilder(text, rounds);
    timeStringBuffer(text, rounds);
    timeStringBuilder(text, rounds);

    // And now the final results
    System.out.println("StringBuffer:  " + timeStringBuffer(text,rounds));
    System.out.println("StringBuilder: " + timeStringBuilder(text,rounds));
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

You can run the test on your system to be sure, but I get same results for
both classes. Occasionally StringBuffer wins, sometimes StringBuilder wins,
but most of the time they are even. Why is this? There are probably two
main reasons:

  * Modern JVMs are surprisingly good in optimizing away unused locks. It's
possible that the benchmark was so simple that JVM managed to do that.
Perhaps more complex benchmark would benefit StringBuilder.
  * When you call `StringBuffer.toString()`, it creates a new String which
shares the same array of characters, but `StringBuilder.toString()` will need
to clone the characters. (See JDK sources for details.)

So there's probably no point in converting old code, but I think I'll still
be using StringBuilder for new code. Perhaps it will pay of for more
complex cases.
